feat(AIP-193): specify how to "change" messages. (#1098)
googleapis/aip: aip/general/0193.md

**Note:** `ErrorInfo` represents a special case. There **must** be exactly one
`ErrorInfo`. It is required.

### Error messages

For each error, the service **must** populate the `message` field on [`google.rpc.Status`][Status]. This error message,

- is developer-facing, human-readable, and in the application's
  native language

> - both explains the error and offer an actionable resolution to it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- both explains the error and offers an actionable resolution to it
```
Nit

  ([citation](https://cloud.google.com/apis/design/errors#error_model))

**Note:** Sometimes, services elect to publish debug error message in
English rather than the application's native language so that messages
are more easily universally searchable in common online knowledge bases.

> For new errors, the payload **must** include `ErrorInfo` and any

Reviewer: New errors as a new instance of an existing error type? Or for new error _types_?

maybe s/types/modes/ idk

Author: It's kind of left intentionally vague, but it is when you would introduce a new value for "reason" in `ErrorInfo`. Not, when you would add an `ErrorInfo` to an error with an existing error message and code pair, but an entirely new error scenario. Any help with the wording given that would be much appreciated.

Author: > When introducing a new error, a failure scenario that did not previously occur for the service, the payload **must** include `ErrorInfo` and any variables found in dynamic segments of the error message **must** be represented in `metadata`.

wdyt?

Author: I pushed this change. Feel free to "unresolve".

variables found in dynamic segments of the error message **must** be
represented in `metadata`. See, "[Dynamic
variables](#dynamic-variables)".

#### Changing error messages

Changes to `message` on `Status` **must not** change it if your
service's API design governing body decides that to do so represents a

> breaking change and **should not** change it the text contains dynamic

Reviewer: I'm sorry I didn't grok this paragraph. Can this be reworded to be a bit more concise and separated? Something like,

```
If your service's API design governing body decides that changing a `Status.message` is a
breaking change, then the `Status.message` **must not** be changed.

If the `Status.message` contains dynamic data, but `ErrorInfo` was absent at the time of
launch, then the `Status.message` **should not** be changed.

To present a different, potentially more detailed error, consider using the
following approach.

// Go on to explain how that works...
```

Note: I used `Status.message`, but you can use your "message on Status" style too idc

Author: Done.

**Note:** `ErrorInfo` represents a special case. There **must** be exactly one
`ErrorInfo`. It is required.

### Error messages

For each error, the service **must** populate the `message` field on
[`google.rpc.Status`][Status]. This error message,

- is a developer-facing, human-readable "debug message"
- is presented in the service's native language
- both explains the error and offers an actionable resolution to it

>   ([citation](https://cloud.google.com/apis/design/errors#error_model))

Reviewer 2: nit: it would be nice to consolidate from cloud.google.apis/design/ to here, vs link out. Maybe a future issue?

Author: Filed https://github.com/aip-dev/google.aip.dev/issues/1108

**Note:** Sometimes a service will elect to always present
`Status.message` in English rather than the application's native
language so that messages are easily searchable in common knowledge
bases, such as StackOverflow&trade;.

> When introducing a new error, a failure scenario that did not previously

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When introducing an error that represents a failure scenario that did not previously
```

nit: probably my  ignorance of english grammar, but "introducing" already implies new , and it seems like it's easier to read to explicitly state that it represents a failure scenario vs the comma.

occur for the service, the payload **must** include `ErrorInfo` and any
variables found in dynamic segments of the error message **must** be
present in `ErrorInfo.metadata`. See, "[Dynamic
variables](#dynamic-variables)".

#### Changing error messages

> If your service's API design governing body decides that altering

Reviewer 2: these are Google AIP's, so we should know whether we govern this or not, correct? and state that clearly here.

Author: Some PAs have their own governance.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be addressed - the guidance is vague and for someone arriving at this page, unclear as to how to figure out whether this is backwards incompatible or not.

Can it be explicitly stated that the change is allowed at minimum? the *must not* in here should be added by the PA in their own guidance then.

Author: I changed it so it explicitly states that `Status.message` **may** change if not disallowed. Is this what you're after?

Reviewer 2: I'm more not a fan of the "governing bodies" which is vague and leaves a reader unable to figure out what to do next. 

If I was new to Google and I read this sentence, what would I do next? how would I find out if there was some other governing body?

I don't think we really need to discuss that this could or could not be a backwards incompatible change, unless we're going to say something authoritative like *should* or *should not*.

`Status.message` represents a backwards incompatible change, then
`Status.message` **must not** change.

<a name="status-message-warning"></a>
**Warning:** **Use extreme caution** when changing `Status.message`.

> API consumers often treat this error message as **part of the API

Reviewer 2: nit: some of these feels like "Rationale" more than guidance. Guidance at most briefly elaborates on a particular choice, while rationale explains the choice in-depth.

Author: Ack, IMO it is important to include this warning here.

contract**. Clients perform string matches on the text to differentiate
one error for another and even parse the error message to extract
variables from dynamic segments.

There is a safer alternative. The service can chose to include an error
message by adding [`google.rpc.LocalizedMessage`][LocalizedMessage] to
[`Status.details`][Status details].

> The error message presented in `LocalizedMessage.message` **may** be the

Reviewer 2: is this sentence stating something meaningful? if it *may* do something and *may* not do it, then that's all the options available and this is basically saying either is acceptable. Which feels similar to not including specific guidance at all.

Reviewer 2: if it is relevant: is it possible to clarify why one would choose one over the other?

Author: See below. It is explained.

same as `Status.message` or it **may** be an alternate message.

Reasons to present the same error message in both locations include the
following:

- The service plans to localize either immediately or in the near
  future.  See, "[Localization](#localization)".
- It affords clients the ability to find an error message consistently
  in one location, `LocalizedMessaage.message`, across all methods of
  the API Service.

Reasons to present an error message in `LocalizedMessage.message` that
differs from `Status.message` include the following:

- The service requires an end-user facing error message that differs
  from the "debug message".
- Ongoing, iterative error message improvements are expected.

> When including `LocalizedMessage`, both fields, `locale` and `message`,

Reviewer 2: can you include a proto example here? that'll help make it a little easier to follow the guidance.

Author: Do you mean a JSON example? Do you really think that is necessary? The proto has two string fields, `locale` and `message`. `locale` is like "en-US", stated and obvious and `message` has the error message. Also, the proto is linked to more than once.

Reviewer 2: yeah, I guess it's a json payload.

I think an example at the top that has a fully populated response would be great, including:

- status
- code
- errorinfo (domain, reason metadata)
- localizedmessage (locale, message)

So one can see how to properly construct a response and how these values could related to each other.

It's hard to grasp how all of these values fit with each other a visualization to connect them all.

Author: Added. PTAL

**must** be populated.  If the service is to be localized, the value of
`locale` **must** change dynamically. See,
"[Localization](#localization)". Otherwise, `locale` **must** always
present the service's default locale, e.g. "en-US".

When adding an error message via `LocalizedMessage`, `ErrorInfo`
**must** be introduced either before or at the same time. If there are
dynamic segments found in the text, the values of these variables

> **must** be included `ErrorInfo.metadata`.  See, "[Dynamic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**must** be included in `ErrorInfo.metadata`.  See, "[Dynamic
```

**Note:** `ErrorInfo` represents a special case. There **must** be exactly one
`ErrorInfo`. It is required.

### Error messages

The [`google.rpc.Status`][Status] error payload **should** contain two

> error messages.

Reviewer 2: nit: explain what those error message are here as a summary?

Author: This is outdated.

1. The payload **must** contain an error message in the `message` field
   found at the root of [`Status`][Status].

> 1. The payload **should** contain

Reviewer 3: silly question: How does the API server know the appropriate locale to display to clients? While there may be existing patterns over HTTP (eg., the 'Accept-Language' header which is known to be wrong and inappropriately deferential to English), I'm not sure the same can be said for gRPC.

Author: iMO, it is beyond the scope of the AIP to prescribe how the infrastructure that a given company builds to implement the API designs found in these AIPs. Yes, 'Accept-Language' is reasonable.

>    [`google.rpc.LocalizedMessage`][LocalizedMessage] in `details` on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   [`google.rpc.LocalizedMessage`][LocalizedMessage] in the `details` field of
```
IDK I think it parallels with the language in the previous item for `message`.

Author: Structure changed after major edits.

   `Status`. This is the location of the second error message.

> The error message on `Status` should,

Reviewer: Is this a requirement word "should" or best practices "should"? 

Perhaps this:
> The error message `Status` is most effective when it,
>
> - is developer-facing, ...
> - explains the error...

OR make it a `**should**`

- Be developer-facing, human-readable, and in English

> - Both expalin the error and offer an actionable resolution to it

Reviewer 3: s/expalin/explain/

  ([citation](https://cloud.google.com/apis/design/errors#error_model))

Once launched the value of `message` at the root-level of `Status`

> **must not** change for the error payload to be backwards compatible.

Author: @jskeet points out that this statement may need further clarification, e.g. definition around what "backward compatible" means in this context.

Reviewer: I would also say we need clarification around what the "error payload" constitutes e.g. the `message` is paired with the `code` OR the `message` is paired with the specific error mode (e.g. invalid location errors), so that services can reasonably keep track of what `message` an "error payload" should use.

Not a blocking comment for this PR.

Author: Good point. However, this statement was removed, which is not to say that we do not need to address this concern at a later date.

When including `LocalizedMessage`, both the `locale` and `message`
fields **must** be present.

#### Changing error messages

A new, additional error message **may** be added because the error

> message at the root of the payload **must not** change once launched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
message at the root of the payload cannot be changed once launched.
```
I think this guidance is already provided and here it seems to be the motivating reason, not guidance.

I don't feel strongly about this comment though.

> message at the root of the payload **must not** change once launched.

Reviewer 3: IMO changing the error message is not a breaking change and should not be treated as such. A well behaved client should operate based on error codes and not the contents of the messages themselves. If a client need the specificity of the error message itself for processing purposes, that's an indication that an error code or sub-code is needed.

Author: I updated this per our discussion. PTAL.

This second error messages allows for continuous, iterative
improvement. It is potentially displayed directly to end users by
client application.

> When adding a new error messsage with `LocalizedMessage`, `ErrorInfo`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding a new error messsage via `LocalizedMessage`, `ErrorInfo`
```
Nnit: Maybe more clear?

Author: Fixed.

> When adding a new error messsage with `LocalizedMessage`, `ErrorInfo`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding a new error message with `LocalizedMessage`, `ErrorInfo`
```
Typo

Author: Fixed.

**must** be introduced before or concurrently. If there are dyanmic

> variables found in the message, these variables must be included in the

Reviewer: In which message? The LocalizedMessage.message i.e. the "new" message? or the "old" one?

Author: I clarified this by saying that `ErrorInfo` is required for new errors and that variables **must** be in `metadata`. Feel free to reopen.

> variables found in the message, these variables must be included in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variables found in the message, these variables **must be** included in the
```

Author: Fixed.

`metadata` field on `ErrorInfo`, a `map<string, string>`. See, "[Dynamic
variables](#dynamic-variables)".

**Warning:** If `LocalizedMessage` is released without `ErrorInfo` even
the new error message **must not** change. To do so, would be backwards

> incompatible, effectively locking all error messages in the payload.

Reviewer: I'm not really sure what this is saying. Is this trying to say that "if `LocalizedMessage` is released, but `ErrorInfo` isn't at all, then the `LocalizedMessage.message` must match the original `Status.message`"?

Author: Rephrased.

If the service is location aware, the value of `locale` **should**
change.  See, "[Localization](#localization)". Otherwise, the field
**may** contain the service's default locale, e.g.  "en-US", as its

> value, always, allowing the opportunity to add localization later.

Reviewer: Are the `**may**` and `always` conflicting here? Should it be `**must** contain the service's default locale...as its value`?

Author: Fixed.

#### Dynamic variables

The best, actionable error messages include dynamic segments. These
variable parts of the message are specific to a particular request.
Consider the following example:

> The Book, "The Great Gatsby", is unvailable at the Library, "Garfield
> East". It is expected to be available again on 2199-05-13.

> **Note:** The preceeding error message is made actionable by the

Reviewer: Is this really a "Note"? Kind of seems like a direct explanation of how the example fulfills the opening statement.

Author: Fixed.

context, both that orignates from the request, the title of the Book and
the name of the Library, and by the information that is known only by
the service, i.e. the expected return date of the Book.

All dynamic variables found in error messages **must** also appear in
the `map<string, string>` field, `metadata` (found on the *required*
`ErrorInfo`).  For example, the `metadata` map for the sample error

> message above **must** include *at least* the following key/value pairs:

Reviewer: I'm not sure that an example should contain a requirement word. Perhaps replace it with `will`

Author: Fixed.

```yaml

> bookTitle: "The Great Gatsby"

Reviewer: So the metadata keys must be camelCase (JSON style)? Or is it based on the transport? e.g. ESF will coerce them to camelCase when sending back an HTTP response from a gRPC-HTTP transcoded Status, while pure gRPC would use snake_case?

idc either way but let's be specific about that.

Author: It must be camelCase. This is specified in the comment about `ErrorInfo`. Should it be specified here as well?

Author: Fixed.

Reviewer: For sure thank you, this seems like a good spot to include it given the broad audience it will have.

library: "Garfield East"
expectedReturnDate: "2199-05-13"
```

Dynamic variables that do not appear in an error message **may** also be
included in `metadata` to provide additional information to the client
to be used programmatically.

Once present in `metadata`, keys **must** continue to be included in the
map for the error payload to be backwards compatible.

#### Localization

The error message, found in the payload on `Status`, **must** be in

> English. If a localized error message is also required, the service

Reviewer 3: I realize this line isn't changed by you, but ick all the same. While a single company providing API's should adhere to a single language for consistency, as far as general API guidance goes I don't think it should necessarily be English.

Author: Agree.

> **should** use [`google.rpc.LocalizedMessage`][LocalizedMessage] in the

Reviewer: Not `**must**`?

Author: That was as it was before. I just moved the section so it looks new. Should I change it?

Reviewer: Perhaps not if it was there before...kind of surprised it wasn't a must before.

parsing the string error message. For these reasons, `ErrorInfo` is
required for *every* error response.

> The field, `message`, on `Status` is immutable because clients **may**

Reviewer: Again, I'm not sure the requirement word style for `**may**` is right here since this is a reason for doing something.

Author: Removed additions to rationale section altogether since we are reversing the decision that `message` should be immutable.
